# How to build a bash script

## Learning

### 1-6: Setting up secure script permissions

### 1-7: Project: Backup script

- Overall goal?
  - Create a backup script
  - To backup what?
    - All the files in home directory
  - What else must the script be?
    - Professionally formatted
    - Why?
      - To be shared with colleagues
- What should we do?
  - Create a bash script
  - Called?
    - `backup_script`
  - Where?
    - `~/bash_course` directory
  - What should the script do?
    - Save all files in home directory
    - And save in what format?
      - `.tar`
  - Core components:
    - First?
      - Shebang line
    - Second?
      - Commands
    - Third?
       - Exit statement
       - With what?
         - Appropriate exit code
    - Fourth?
      - Five pieces of profession information
      - First?
        - Author
      - Second?
        - Date created
      - Third?
        - Date last modified
      - Fourth?
        - Description
      - Fifth?
        - Usage

### Addings scripts to your PATH

- How is the system `PATH` edited?
  - Using `.profile` file
  - What does this have?
    - Configuration files for bash shell
- Command to add the script to path?
  - `export`
  - What arguments?
    `PATH="$PATH:<path/to/src>"
  - Why place new folder in path at end of path?
    - Won't overwrite system defaults

## Questions

### 1-3: Core components of a bash script

- First line?
  - Shebang
  - Structure?
    - `#!/bin/bash`
- Last line?
  - Exit code
  - What should it be?
    - `exit 0`
    - What would `exit 1` mean?
      - A generic error
    - What other numbers are available for errored exits?
      - 2-255

### 1-6: Setting up secure script permissions

- Command to give the user all permissions for a file and other people only read access?
  - `chmod 744 <file_name>`
  - Minimum to allow all people to execute a file?
    -  `555`
    - Why not `111`?
      - Because they need read permissions to execute the script
    - Recommended for scripts?
      - 744
  - What do the following contribute to the total?
    - Read?
      - 4
    - Write?
      - 2
    - Execute?
      - 1
- Site that helps you work out what permissions a certain number gives?
  - `permissions-calculator.org`