# Variables and shell expansions

## Learning

### Parameter expansion tricks



### Command substitution

- Syntax?
  - `$(<command>)`
  - *Question*
    - What is the difference from parameter expansion?
  - *Question*
    - What is the purpose of putting the shebang at the top of the script?
      - Does it force it always to be evaluated by that program?
- Syntax to make a script executable?
  - `chmod 744 <path>`
- Explain this line:
  - `tar -csv ~/bash_course/my_backup_"$(date)".tar ~/* 2>/dev/null`
  - Well, it performs command substitution before running the `tar` command

## 2-16: Project

- What are we working on?
  - A backup script
  - *Question*
    - Should I have some version of this already?
- Issues to address:
  - First issue?
    - No output given to user
    - What should happen?
      - Tell user script is running
  - Second issue?
    - Colleagues cannot run script
    - Why not?
      - Do not have `bash_course` directory on system
    - What should happen instead?
      - Create backup in whatever directory the user runs the script from
- Tasks:
  - First task?
    - Edit `backup_script` script to print out two lines
    - What is the first line?
      - `Hello, <user_name>`
      - What else about this?
        - Username should have first letter capitalised
    - What is the second line?
      - I will now back up your home directory, `</path/to/home-directory>`
  - Second task?

### Arithmetic expansions

- Syntax?
  - `$((<expression>))`
  - What does this do?
    - Replaces `$((<expression>))` with result of evaluating `<expression>
    - What is `<expression>`?
      - A mathematical expression
  - Operator for:
    - Exponentiation?
      `<base> ** <exponent>`
    - Modular?
      - `<base> & <divisor>`
      - What does this return?
        - Remainder after dividing `<base>` by `<divisor>`
  - Can arithmetic expansion handle decimal numbers?
    - No
    - What does `$((2.5 + 1))` give?
      - An error
    - What does `$((5 % 2))` give?
      - 2
    - What do we do as a result?
      - Use the `bc` command

### Dealing with decimal numbers - the `bc` command

- Does `bc` handle decimal places by default?
  - No
  - How to make it handle `k` decimal places?
    - Run `bc; scale=k`

### Tilde expansion

- What is tilde expansion generally about?
  - What `~<parameter>` gets evaluated to
- Command to take us back to the previous directory?
  - `cd ~-`

### Brace expansions

- What is brace expansion for?
  - Generate sequences of text that follow a particular pattern
- Syntax for brace expansion?
  - `{<text>}`
  - What can you not put inside the brace expansion?
    - A space
  - Syntax to expand two texts out?
    - `{<text1> <text2>}`
  - Syntax to expand a range of integers out?
    - `{<int1>..<int2>}`
    - How to keep the numbers all having the same length?
      - Add the right number of leading zeroes before `<int1>`
    - How to only use ever k-th number?
      - `{<int1>..<int2>..<k>}`
  - Syntax to expand the alphabet out?
    - `{<letter1>..<letter2>}`
  - What happens if you put `{}` inside inverted commas?
    - No brace expansion is performed

## Questions

- How many types of parameters are there?
  - Three
  - Types?
    - Variables
    - Positional parameters
    - Special parameters
- How many types of variables are there?
  - Two
  - What are they?
    - User-defined
    - Shell
    - What types of shell variables are there?
      - Depends on the shell
    - What is the naming style for user-defined variables?
      - Lower-case
    - What do the following shell variables store:
      - `PATH`?
        - List of directories to be searched for executables
      - `HOSTNAME`? 
        - Name of current machine
      - `HOSTTYPE`?
        - CPU architecture of current machine
      - `PS1`?
        - Terminal prompt string
- Altering parameter expansion:
  - Syntax?
    - `${<paramter> <commands>}`
  - Make first letter lower case?
    - `${<paramter>,}`
  - Make all letters lower case?
    - `${<parameter>,,}`
  - Make first letter upper case?
    - `${<parameter>^}`
  - Make all letters upper case/
    - `${<parameter>^^}$
  - Get length of variable?
    - `${#<parameter>}`
  - Choose only characters from m characters in until n characters on?
    - `${<parameter>:m:n}$`
- Syntax for command substitution?
  - `$(<command>)`
- Syntax for arithmetic expansions?
  - `$((<expression>))`
- Does `bc` handle decimal places by default?
  - No
  - How to make it handle `k` decimal places?
    - Run `bc; scale=k`
- What does `~<user_name>` give?
  - The home directory of that user
- What environment variable gives the last directory you were in?
  - `OLDPWD`
  - Tild expansion that gives the last directory you were in?
    - `~-`
    - What does `~+` give?
      - Current directory
- What is brace expansion for?
  - Generate sequences of text that follow a particular pattern
- Syntax for brace expansion?
  - `{<text>}`
  - What can you not put inside the brace expansion?
    - A space
  - Syntax to expand two texts out?
    - `{<text1> <text2>}`
  - Syntax to expand a range of integers out?
    - `{<int1>..<int2>}`
    - How to keep the numbers all having the same length?
      - Add the right number of leading zeroes before `<int1>`
    - How to only use ever k-th number?
      - `{<int1>..<int2>..<k>}`
  - Syntax to expand the alphabet out?
    - `{<letter1>..<letter2>}`
  - What happens if you put `{}` inside inverted commas?
    - No brace expansion is performed